In Shakespeare’s Hamlet, Ophelia is a character best understood in relation to other characters: she is Laertes’ sister, Polonius’ daughter, Hamlet’s lover. Ophelia’s initial, seemingly tangential status in the play makes her eventual madness and death unexpectedly jarring. Never allowed insight into her mind through straightforward soliloquies and monologues, we are only able to understand Ophelia through her interactions with other characters. Ophelia is constantly thought and talked about in terms of her sexuality or lack thereof, and often in association with flowers, shaping the way she thinks about her own sexual purity. Flowers are an apt image: they are both the sexual organs of plants and are also often used in various contexts as symbols of beauty and purity. Mirroring the many ways one might think of flowers, Ophelia comes to associate them with opposing pure and impure self-conceptions. The tension between the different ways that Ophelia perceives her own sexual purity, reflected in the different ways her sexuality is associated with flowers, reveals how Ophelia is objectified in order for others to project their ideals of female purity onto her. Ultimately, the tragedy of Ophelia arises from her inability to bear the burden of these external projections.

Laertes and Polonius’ association of Ophelia with flowers emphasizes her purity and innocence. Before leaving Denmark for France, Laertes warns Ophelia against giving too much weight to Hamlet’s affections and advises her to protect her beauty with chastity. To further stress his point, he quotes a proverb: “The canker galls the infants of the spring” (1.3.38). Laertes compares Hamlet and his advances to a cankerworm ¬– a caterpillar, an insatiable pest – and Ophelia to an early spring blossom. Immediately, the impression is that Laertes is most concerned that Hamlet might corrupt Ophelia’s purity and consequently her beauty, which is flower-like and blossoming. However, in likening Ophelia specifically to an “infant,” Laertes reveals that he perceives her to be not just youthful, but almost infantile. The association conveys a perception of naiveté and suggests that Ophelia’s beauty and purity is intimately connected to her perceived innocence. After Laertes has left, Polonius offers Ophelia more advice. When she tells Polonius about Hamlet’s advances, Polonius dismissively chides her for “speak[ing] like a green girl” (1.3.100). “Green” is reminiscent of the natural diction that Laertes used before and, followed by “girl”, marries the imagery of flowers and nature with youth and innocence. Thus, Laertes’ and Polonius’ association of Ophelia with flowers demonstrates an exaggeratedly pure perception of Ophelia with an emphasis on her innocence.

Hamlet’s rejection of this pure conception of Ophelia reveals her own understanding of her purity. Hamlet asserts that Ophelia’s beauty “will sooner transform honesty from what it is to a bawd than the force of honesty can translate beauty into his likeness” (3.1.112-114). Unlike Laertes and Polonius, Hamlet does not believe chastity can protect beauty. Rather, he claims that Ophelia has allowed her beauty to go unchecked, transforming her purity into the opposite. Specifically, Hamlet criticizes the way “[y]ou jig and amble, and you lisp, you nickname God’s creatures” – misuses of her beauty (3.1.143-44). Worst of all, she excuses her “wantonness” with “ignorance” (3.1.145). Hamlet directly challenges the purity that Laertes and Polonius exalted and sought to protect by implying that Ophelia’s innocence or “ignorance” is disingenuous. However, Ophelia appears to believe in Laertes and Polonius’ pure and innocent conception of herself. For instance, when questioned earlier by her father, she affirms her own naiveté answering, “I do not know, my lord, what I should think” (1.3.103). Accused of impurity by Hamlet, Ophelia is skeptical and dismisses his accusations as symptoms of his madness: “Oh, what a noble mind is here o’erthrown!” (3.1.149). This immediate resistance to his accusations further corroborates Ophelia’s confidence in her own purity. Her swift rejection of Hamlet’s accusations also shows the inflexibility with which she regards purity. Given how exaggerated and idealized Laertes and Polonius’ conception of her is, impurity is understandably immensely undesirable. Ophelia thus initially appears to believe staunchly in the pure conception of herself put forth by Laertes and Polonius, despite Hamlet’s accusations of impurity.

Yet, in her following speech Ophelia perhaps unconsciously recognizes some truth in Hamlet’s claim that she may not be as pure as Laertes and Polonius perceive her to be. Reversing her brother and father’s flower association, Ophelia refers to Hamlet as the “rose of the fair state” and laments how she “sucked the honey of his musicked vows” (3.1.151, 155). No longer a delicate flower preyed upon by “cankers”, Ophelia turns herself into a small animal feeding off of Hamlet. Given that the “canker” was an impure and corrupting force in Laertes’ analogy, Ophelia’s reversal is an acknowledgement of something within herself that is actively destructive and thus represents an important shift in her self-perception. Steeped in Laertes and Polonius’ rhetoric about female purity, Ophelia believed that she embodied this ideal. Now, having identified impurity in herself and given how unbearable this is due to the high expectations of her family, Ophelia faces pressure to revert back to the idealized state of her purity.

Upon Laertes’ return to Elsinore, the tension between Ophelia’s pure and impure self-perceptions comes to the fore. Finding that his sister has gone mad, Laertes immediately addresses her with an epithet echoing his idealization of her purity: “O rose of May” (4.2.157-58). Laertes describes her not only as a beautiful flower, a rose, but one of May, springtime. This specification alludes to the importance of her youthfulness and innocence in his perception of her. He follows this with, “Dear maid” and “kind sister,” only to finally address her by her name at the very end: “sweet Ophelia” (4.2.158). Laertes thinks of her first as a representation of maidenhood and chastity, then of kindness, and lastly as a person: “Ophelia.” Ophelia, encapsulated in the image of a flower, is more of a symbol for feminine purity and beauty than an actual person with complexities. Idealized to this extent, Ophelia faces immense pressure from her family to be free of impurity and live up to this perception. Having identified a flaw within herself that prevents her from doing so, Ophelia is driven to re-attain this ideal state of purity at any cost. When Ophelia in her madness begins to distribute imaginary flowers, it appears at first as though she has successfully dismissed Hamlet’s accusations and that her self-perception is aligned with Laertes’ idealization of her purity and innocence. However, upon analyzing the flowers that she distributes, it quickly becomes clear that in fact Ophelia has appropriated this image and is using it to a different end.

The flowers that Ophelia distributes reveal the guilt that she feels for her recently identified impurity. She begins with fennel and columbines, symbols of flattery and unchastity , respectively, which point to a sensation of guilt because perceptions of her purity are mere flattery given her perceived impurity or unchastity. Next, she hands out rue, representing regret or repentance . While Ophelia glosses over fennel and columbines in one sentence, she devotes a comparatively larger number of words to rue, suggesting the relative importance of this flower and its meaning. Unlike the other two flowers, she gives rue to “you” and also keeps some for “me,” acknowledging that “[y]ou may wear your rue with a difference” (4.2.175-77). Although it is not clear who “you” is directed towards, the inclusion of both “you” and “me” creates a collective “we” in which there is a sense of solidarity in repentance. The implication is that a group of people who understand her mental turmoil and with whom she could repent in solidarity would help alleviate her mental burden. However, the shortness and abruptness of the following sentence interrupts this sentiment: “There’s a daisy” (4.2.177). Ophelia does not hand anyone this flower, but rather simply notices it, and with it, a caveat to the solidarity that she previously expressed. Daisies, connoting concealment , point to the incongruity of how she and how others perceive her purity. Ophelia’s impurity is self-perceived and thus, because she is seen by most other characters as an emblem of purity, the source of her guilt is concealed from the rest of the world. Thus, there is no “we” or any type of solidarity in her repentance. Instead, the impurity for which she feels guilt is an isolating force, amplifying her heavy, psychological burden because she must bear it alone. The mental burden of Laertes’ and Polonius’ exaggerated and unrealistic conception of Ophelia’s purity thus causes her to feel an isolating sensation of guilt.

Even though Ophelia’s words appear to fit into an established pattern insofar as flower imagery is used to think about her sexual purity, it is possible that Ophelia’s words are the mere ramblings of an insane person, devoid of any substantial meaning. As an unnamed gentleman points out, Ophelia’s audience has a tendency to hear “the unshapèd use” or unruly nature of her speech and “botch the words up fit to their own thoughts,” (4.2.8-10). Ultimately, however, he concludes that “[h]er speech is nothing,” (4.2.7). This is a fair objection and analysis of Ophelia’s words could indeed be conjecture. Furthermore, the fact that the play itself raises this objection directly preceding Ophelia’s entrance as a mad woman gives more weight to the suggestion that we should not try to read unsubstantiated meaning into her words.

Although there may be no coherent thought or substantial meaning to her muddled words, it is impossible to ignore that something is being communicated through Ophelia’s words. Laertes puts forth a potentially useful way of thinking about her speech, noting that “This nothing’s more than matter” (4.2.169). Acknowledging that her speech is devoid of coherent thought – it is “nothing” – Laertes cannot help noticing the emotional impact of her words. After Ophelia finishes distributing her flowers, Laertes, although unsure exactly what her words mean, picks up on her emotional suffering: “Thought and afflictions, passion, hell itself” (4.2.181). Laertes is not falling into the trap that the unnamed gentleman identifies by giving undue meaning to her scrambled words. Rather, he is understanding Ophelia’s mad words by picking up on the emotional connotations of her words. Similarly, by thinking about the connotations of the flowers that Ophelia mentions and the shape of Ophelia’s speech we are able to get a fuller picture of her emotional state without assigning arbitrary meanings to her words.

The fact that Ophelia communicates this emotional state of guilt through the same imagery that Laertes and Polonius used in praising her purity shows Ophelia’s wish to revert to her previous conception of herself. Before, Ophelia associated flowers with youthful, even naïve, innocence and purity, and herself with flowers. Driven by guilt to revisit this association, Ophelia tries to reclaim her previously perceived innocence. In fact, the very act of distributing flowers and speaking in riddles is childlike, reminiscent of the ways Laertes and Polonius infantilized her earlier in the play. However, even as Ophelia desperately tries to revert to this innocence, thereby ridding herself of the impurity she now sees in herself, this proves to be impossible. Although speaking in the language of flower imagery, her feelings of guilt seep through in the connotations of each flower. This is because the state of purity that she is trying to revert to is ultimately fictitious, a projection of Laertes and Polonius’ ideals that she was led to believe about herself because she did not know better. Having identified some truth in Hamlet’s accusations – that she is not completely pure – Ophelia cannot revert to her previous state.

The culminating association of Ophelia with flowers in death represents her final attempt to re-attain the ideal state of purity, and the ultimate impossibility of this task. As Gertrude describes, before her death Ophelia was making “fantastic garlands … of crowflowers, nettles, daisies, and long purples” (5.1.168). The flower imagery returns in Ophelia’s final moments as she makes flower crowns, a child-like activity that calls to mind the innocence she is striving to reclaim in order to purge herself of her impurity and guilt. Yet, once again the implications of her flowers reveal the impossibility of her goal. The double connotation of “long purples, / That liberal shepherds give a grosser name, / But our cold maids do dead men’s fingers call them” illustrates Ophelia’s predicament (5.1.169-70). On the one hand, long purples can be called by a lewd name, just as Ophelia might be actively unchaste. Yet, even the name that “cold maids” call this flower, “dead men’s fingers,” calls to mind decay and corruption. Likewise, even if Ophelia should act like a “cold maid,” the knowledge of the impurity she sees within herself has corrupted the innocent and pure conception she used to have of herself. Driven to recapture an impossible conception of purity, Ophelia collapses under the pressure of attempting and failing to live up to Laertes and Polonius’ idealized version herself.

A. C. Bradley’s conception of the tragic world order, delineated in his lecture, “The Substance of Shakespearean Tragedy,” can help us understand the tragic effect of Ophelia’s death. In this world order, moral good is synonymous with existence and moral evil with destruction, with “the inner being or soul of this order akin to good” (23). In fact, according to Bradley, the tragic world order is so vehemently opposed to evil that no matter how miniscule the amount of “evil” – how trivial a defect in one’s character – the nature of the world order is such that “it would seem to be bent on nothing short of good in perfection” (23). The feeling of tragedy arises because in ridding the world of a character’s evil, we also lose their good qualities as well. Thus, tragedy presents “a world travailing for perfection, but bringing to birth, together with glorious good, an evil which it is able to overcome only by self-torture and self-waste” (26).

Condensing Bradley’s conception of the tragic world order to the individual, Ophelia’s death can be seen as a necessary, but tragic conclusion to the identification of impurity within herself. Ophelia’s self-perceived impurity is an “evil” in Bradley’s terminology, a corrupting force that ultimately destroys the person it inhabits, much like a parasite does its host organism. According to Bradley, no amount of good can overpower evil. Similarly, even as Ophelia struggles to reclaim her previous pure self-perception, the impossibility of this idealized version of herself and the knowledge of her impurity renders this pursuit futile. Unable to bear the burden of external perceptions of her purity any longer, Ophelia drowns. In the end, only death, the extermination of the entire host, gets rid of the impurity. The tragedy of Ophelia’ death arises because we do not just get rid of her impurity, but we also lose her wonderfully good qualities: her beauty, her kindness, her thoughtfulness. Laertes loses a sister, Hamlet his potential bride.

However, the tragedy of Ophelia’s narrative is not simply felt when she dies, but throughout her narrative. Ophelia’s madness represents a loss of mental capacities and of herself. We perceive her as pitiful when she cannot form coherent thoughts and plays with imaginary flowers. Even before this, the burden that Ophelia must bear as others project their opinions about female purity onto her and as she struggles under the impossible weight of these ideals is also tragic. Laertes’ and Polonius’ unreasonably high expectations of her and Hamlet’s harsh words to her are both forms of psychological cruelty, urging her to relinquish control and mold herself into their ideals. Thus, while tragedy is felt when we feel or see loss, this loss pervades throughout the play. Every step of the way Ophelia loses a part of herself until finally all parts of her dissolve into the water with her lifeless body.