Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein is a novel about education. Shelley’s own education was steeped in the philosophical writings of her mother, Mary Wollstonecraft, and in her novel, Shelley engages with many of the core ideas of The Vindication of the Rights of Women. In this seminal text, Wollstonecraft contends against the way society treats “females rather as women than human creatures” and argues that because women have rational souls equal to those of men, they deserve an equal education (7). Such an education should empower an individual to freely exercise her reason with the ultimate goal that women will be better able to fulfill their roles in society as meaningful companions to men and effective mothers (Wollstonecraft 4). Much as female education is at the heart of Wollstonecraft’s writings, so is the education of a woman–Safie–at the literal center of Shelley’s novel. In fact, as Shelley wrote Safie’s passage in 1816, Charles Robinson proves through archival research that she was rereading sections of Vindication (135). Safie, a Turkish woman introduced for the first time halfway through the novel, flees from her oppressive father to be educated by her French fiancé Felix De Lacey. While at first Safie appears to be the prototypical Wollstonecraftian heroine, by portraying Safie as primarily self-interested, filtering her educational narrative through the voice of Frankenstein’s monster–Shelley’s proxy for the unsympathetic patriarchy–and truncating Safie’s education with the collision with the monster, Mary Shelley provides a realistic answer to Wollstonecraft’s lofty feminist ideals. Ultimately, this portrayal shows how the world as Shelley sees it–divided between unbending feminists and the entrenched, unsympathetic patriarchy–is incapable of making meaningful feminist progress.

At first glance, Safie appears to model Wollstonecraft’s ideal of an empowered female. Wollstonecraft uses “Mahometanism” as a proxy for a society in which females are “treated as a kind of subordinate beings, and not as a part of the human species” (8). Literally escaping from the “Mahometan” oppression represented by her Turkish father and from being “immured within the walls of a haram,” Safie “is a woman escaped from patriarchy as it had been specifically defined and figured in Vindication” (Shelley 99, Zonana 174). As Joyce Zonana writes, it would seem that “in her creation of Safie as a central figure within her own text, Mary Shelley gives imaginative life to her mother’s philosophical critique” (174).

Zonana’s reading appears especially true with regard to Safie’s education. Wollstonecraft is critical of contemporary women’s education because, while men are encouraged to exercise their reasoning, for women, “the cultivation of the understanding is always subordinate to the acquirement of some corporeal accomplishment” (23). To rectify this, women should be “educated by the same pursuits as men” (Wollstonecraft 173). As Safie is educated by Felix, a man, who shares with her intellectually challenging materials that expand her understanding, the content of her education appears to align with Wollstonecraft’s vision. For instance, Felix helps Safie develop an understanding of the politics, “manners, governments, and religions of the different nations of the earth” through readings from Volney’s Ruins of Empires (Shelley 95). This scene aligns closely with Wollstonecraft’s description of the ideal educational format in which women and men are educated not only in the same content but in the same physical setting such that “[t]he elements of religion, history, the history of man, and politics, might also be taught by conversations, in the socratic form” (Wollstonecraft 168). Wollstonecraft’s preference for a conversational structure is reminiscent of her observation that women who are exposed to the intellectual world by “conversing more with men, on general topics, acquire more knowledge” (Wollstonecraft 76). This emphasis on conversation between men and women implies the importance of allowing both genders to engage intellectually on equal footing. In Safie’s education, the presence of both Felix and herself as well as their one-on-one arrangement appear conducive to Wollstonecraft’s coeducational and conversational model. Ultimately, Wollstonecraft believes that uniting the genders in both the physical structure and content of their education will empower women to become “enlightened citizens,” capable of asserting their independence as rational beings. In the long term, the aim of “educating the sexes together [is] to perfect both” so that “women … are prepared to be [men’s] companions rather than their mistresses” and “the intercourse of the sexes will … deserve the name of fellowship” in the form of marriage (Wollstonecraft 173, 165). In both content and form, Wollstonecraft’s ideal female education appears closely mapped onto Safie’s education, suggesting similar results.

However, Alan Richardson questions whether Safie and Felix’s particular arrangement is actually conducive to feminist progress. Noting that the “male domination inherent in the form of Safie’s instruction (independent of its specific content) keeps her in a subordinate situation,” Richardson concludes that in seeking empowerment, Safie is “self-limited” to remain subservient to man (153). In choosing the phrase “self-limited,” Richardson appears to neglect the reality of Safie’s circumstances. Safie faced only two viable choices when deciding her future: return to Turkey with her father and face the palpable oppression of the “Mahometan” state or, flee to the West, and to Felix and the De Laceys, where her mother had told her she would have a chance to gain freedom. Thus, Safie was not so much “self-limited” as she was limited by her circumstances and her options. Still, Richardson raises an important point about the implications of the patriarchal structure built into Safie’s educational experience, in which Felix “bestowed upon” Safie the gift of knowledge (Shelley 96, 114). Shelley’s phrasing appears to consciously draw attention to the hierarchical disparity between Safie and Felix, inviting one to question how well Safie and Felix carry out Wollstonecraft’s ideal coeducational model, as well as the implications of their arrangement and of Wollstonecraft’s vision.

Wollstonecraft envisioned a coeducational model which was importantly characterized by equal, intellectual exchange between the sexes. In structuring Safie’s education such that Felix is her teacher, Shelley appears to question the feasibility of and offer nuance to Wollstonecraft’s model. Just as Felix gets to direct Safie’s studies, so do men more generally get to define what is worth studying in the world. While the fact that Felix is noticeably in a hierarchically superior position to Safie emphasizes this point, in any educational setting, women always have knowledge “bestowed” upon them because the intellectual tradition does not belong to them–it is dominated and curated by men. Thus, an equal exchange of ideas in the form of conversation is unrealistic. Furthermore, the fact that Safie is educated in the masculine intellectual tradition in order to empower herself would appear to only affirm men’s monopoly on knowledge. Shelley shows that because men dominate intellectual capital, in order for women to become empowered they must work through masculine channels as Safie does. Yet, this act does not necessarily preclude their learning. In contrast with Wollstonecraft’s advocacy and at times idealism, Shelley understood the world more realistically. In a journal entry from1838, Shelley writes regarding “the Rights of Women &c — I am not a person of Opinions. I have said elsewhere that human beings differ greatly in this — some have a passion for reforming in the world: others do not cling by to particular opinions. That my Parents & [Percy] Shelley were of the former class, makes me respect it” (JMS 554) . Offering nuance to Wollstonecraft’s writings instead of argument, Shelley thus shows how her approach to the question of female education differs from that of her mother.

Shelley’s realism extends to the portrayal of Safie’s character. Zonana writes that “Safie is a woman who insists on her own possession of a soul … an exemplar of a woman claiming her rights as a rational being” (174). This accurately aligns with Safie’s desire to fulfil her mother’s plea and “aspire to higher powers of intellect, and independence of spirit”, committing herself to “grand ideas and a noble emulation for virtue” (Shelley 99). However, Zonana interprets Safie’s echoing of Wollstonecraft’s phrases and ideas to mean that Safie is the manifestation of Wollstonecraft’s ideas, implying that Safie’s ultimate motivation in seeking an education is to become the ideal wife and “companion to man” in marriage (Wollstonecraft 4). For Wollstonecraft, such a marriage is based on an intimate and deep connection characterized by “friendship, [and] the confidence of respect, instead of blind admiration, and the sensual emotions of fondness” because “friendship … inevitably succeeds love” (Wollstonecraft 30). However, Safie and Felix’s relationship does not have this depth. Shelley uses diminutive adjectives when describing how Safie “exhibited towards [Felix] the simplest and tenderest affection” while alone together in Leghorn, suggesting the immaturity of their relationship (100). Furthermore, for most of their relationship the two could only communicate through an interpreter. Even in Safie’s letters, her most extensive method of communication with Felix, Zonana admittedly reads “a young woman who has been promised in marriage to a man she loves but barely knows” (172). Thus, Safie does not seek out her education because of Wollstonecraftian motivations.

Instead, Safie is motivated primarily by self-interest. Describing Safie’s thought process before fleeing from her father, Shelley writes how “[a] residence in Turkey was abhorrent to her; her religion and feelings were alike adverse to it” (102). On the other hand, “[t]he prospect of marrying a Christian, and remaining in a country where women were allowed to take a rank in society, was enchanting to her” (99). While Safie expresses a wish to marry, the anonymity of “a Christian” points to Safie’s more crucial consideration: access to freedom and the ability to have a social status. Conspicuously absent are any mention of a personal relationship with Felix that one would expect at the center of her thoughts if she were motivated by a desire to fulfill Wollstonecraft’s envisioned ideal role of a good wife and mother. In essence, Safie chose Felix by negation of her other, much less appealing option. Thus, Shelley creates in Safie an alternative to the Wollstonecraftian heroine–one who is motivated foremost by self-interest and a desire for individual freedom.

Anne Mellor provides a way of understanding Shelley’s realism and Safie’s self-interested character. “The unique phenomenon envisioned by Mary Wollstonecraft, the wife as the lifelong intellectual equal and companion of her husband, did not exist in the world of nineteenth-century Europe experienced by Mary Shelley” (Mellor 118). The disconnect between Wollstonecraft’s writings and the world that Shelley perceived around her lays the groundwork to better understanding how Safie’s narrative is as much an exploration into why no such “unique phenomenon” existed in Shelley’s world, as it is a story about female education. Crucial to the former is an evaluation of why Safie’s educational narrative is told from the perspective of Frankenstein’s monster.

Even as Safie strives to empower and educate herself, the monster thinks about Safie in ways that Wollstonecraft explicitly deems regressive. When the monster first sees Safie, he is immediately struck by her “countenance of angelic beauty and expression” (Shelley 93). Later and throughout her narrative, the monster refers to Safie as “lovely Safie” or the “charming Arabian” (Shelley 98, 97). By using these “pretty feminine phrases, which the men condescendingly use to” emphasize women’s supposed intellectual inferiority, the monster refuses to recognize Safie as a “rational creature,” instead treating her as if she “were in a state of perpetual childhood, unable to stand alone” (Wollstonecraft 9). Thus, even as Safie educates herself, thereby explicitly attempting to claim for herself the title of a rational soul, the monster repeatedly denies her humanity and independence in the way that he views her. Such a narrative frame is strange, especially coming from the monster who supposedly developed his own humanity and morality by learning from the De Laceys in this episode.

This tension speaks to the larger question about how best to understand the relationship between Safie and Frankenstein’s monster. Scholars often equate Safie and the monster due to their simultaneous education (Zonana 174, Richardson 153). While such a reading draws an interesting connection between the two, when thinking about the text from the lens of female education it is actually more useful to evaluate how Safie and the monster differ. Although Safie and the monster are both educated by Felix and thus are exposed to the same materials, their educational experiences are crucially different in structure. Specifically, Safie’s education with Felix is coeducational and interactive, two factors that Wollstonecraft believes are integral to engendering understanding and partnership between men and women, both of which are conspicuously absent from the monster’s educational experience.

Instead, the monster is isolated. His experience models the problematic, gender-segregated schooling system that Wollstonecraft understands to be one of the major causes of women’s marginalization (164-65). This crucial difference in Safie’s and the monster’s educational experiences points to the importance of both correct educational content and structure. Learning from Volney about colonialism in the Americas, the monster recounts how he “wept with Safie over the hapless fate of its original inhabitants” and demonstrates his capacity for sympathy (Shelley 95). Yet, although he can extend sympathy to abstract notions of the Americas’ “original inhabitants,” the monster is incapable of mustering sympathy in real life by recognizing Safie’s humanity and status as a rational being. Thus, while proper content is crucial, especially in order for women to access the masculine intellectual tradition, without the correct, coeducational structure students do not learn how to properly interact with each other. However, as he is involuntarily isolated, the monster is also a victim of his circumstances: “I admired virtue and good feelings, and I loved the gentle manners and amiable qualities of my cottagers; but I was shut out from intercourse with them” (Shelley 97). The monster can thus be seen as a product of an educational system that conditions men to be unsympathetic to the humanity of women. Given this interpretation, the monster symbolically stands in for the entrenched unsympathetic patriarchy, taught to dismiss women’s education of any form and degrade their humanity. Filtering Safie’s narrative through the monster’s perspective is important as it shows how women like Safie, attempting to educate themselves, realistically must operate in a world that is hostile to their empowerment.

On the other hand, Felix appears to model the ideal man, sympathetic to feminists’ cause. To this end, he is depicted as overtly liberal. Not only does he educate Safie, he teaches Volney’s Ruins of Empire, an anti-imperialist text strongly associated with radicals in England during the 19th century (Butler 257). Furthermore, he rescued Safie’s father, a man sentenced to death in Paris due to his “his religion and wealth,” because Felix’s “horror and indignation [at the injustice] were uncontrollable”–further indications of Felix’s progressiveness (Shelley 98). Yet, even within the De Lacey family are indications of anti-feminist actions as flagged by Wollstonecraft. Just as the monster degrades Safie in his understanding of her as primarily a beautiful being, so does Felix exoticize her to a similar effect. His references to Safie as his “sweet Arabian” are not only a form of what Wollstonecraft terms “epithets of weakness,” but also associate Safie with her Turkish background of oppression that she so strongly sought to flee (Shelley 93, Wollstonecraft 9). Thus, even as Felix empowers her with an education, the complicated implications of which have been explored above, he simultaneously holds Safie hostage by constraining her to her past and to her physical appearance. Thus, Shelley shows how even structures such as the De Lacey family that appear egalitarian are so rooted in a patriarchal world that they too propagate subtle forms of oppression.

Richardson points to Safie’s performance of “entrancingly beautiful” airs for Mr. De Lacey as a particularly vivid example of her subjugation in this state of seeming liberation (qtd. in 153). Safie’s music is reminiscent of Wollstonecraft’s rejection of “[n]ovels, music, poetry, and gallantry” as legitimate forms of education for their effect of making “women the creatures of sensation” (61). Richardson thus questions “how far the harem has been left behind after all” (153). Even women seeking their own empowerment fall prey to what Wollstonecraft deems acts of self-oppression. By lacing Safie’s narrative in subtle forms of female oppression that so closely follow Wollstonecraft’s text, Shelley shows how nearly impossible it is for a truly liberated female education to occur in reality. And yet, the fact that Safie still receives a meaningful education shows how Shelley’s self-interested and revised version of the Wollstonecraftian heroine can overcome hurdles presented by an otherwise sympathetic and progressive element of the patriarchy such as the De Laceys.

Truncating Safie’s education with the collision with the monster, Shelley dramatizes the incompatibility of feminists and the entrenched, unsympathetic patriarchy. Robinson indicts Safie, Felix, and Agatha as “culpable” for their rejection of the monster, believing that their inability to accept the monster reveals their “humanity in a fallen world and Mary Shelley’s acknowledgement of that fallen human condition” (136). Robinson’s understanding of the “fallen world” and “fallen human condition” as humanity’s incapability of accepting the other, namely the grotesque monster, can be more narrowly applied to a feminist reading of the end of Safie’s narrative. Responding negatively to the monster, Safie and the De Laceys symbolically demonstrate how when feminists and progressives are narrow-minded and unbending in their pursuits, ultimately rejecting and alienating the entrenched and unsympathetic patriarchy, they hurt themselves and their cause. Closing themselves off to the monster, Safie and the De Laceys inadvertently loosed a bitter, murderous menace on the world. Ultimately, they are forced to flee and feminists lose, because the entrenched, unsympathetic patriarchy as represented by the monster is more powerful. Safie’s rejection of the monster and the monster’s denial of her humanity, culminating in this final clash, reveal the incompatibility of what each represents.

Completing her understanding of the bleak landscape that women face in attempting to educate themselves in a meaningful way, Shelley thus demonstrates the importance of open-mindedness in order to make feminist progress. In the truncation of her educational journey, Safie is finally and crucially separated from the Wollstonecraftian prototype, whose narrative would have ended in domestic bliss. Instead, the last thing we know about Safie, the woman whose educational attainment and subsequent empowerment seemed so viable, is that “she will never recover [her] horror” (Shelley 112). Even Shelley’s revised and realistic version of the Wollstonecraftian heroine, who could withstand the subtle oppression present in the De Laceys’ supportive yet patriarchal environment, is no match for the monster who was victimized and conditioned by his environment to unsympathetically deny her empowerment. Reflecting on her own philosophies, Shelley wrote in a journal entry from 1838: “I have never written a word in dis-favour of liberalism; that I have not supported it openly in writing arises from the following causes…. I feel the counter arguments too strongly.… on some topics (especially with regard to my own sex) I am far from making up my mind.” (JMS 554). In the fateful dulling of Safie’s brilliantly determined flame, Shelley shows that in a world in which both Safie and the monster are victimized and denied their respective humanities, both sides must become more open-minded and “feel the counter arguments” for there to be feminist progress. Until then, both Wollstonecraft’s ideals and Safie will remain incompatible and unimaginable to the realists of the world.