Title: The Stain on My Shirt
There was a stain on my plain white T-shirt. No matter how hard I tried, I could not wash it off. It took me almost ten years to realize this taint, this badge with its fleur de lis sewn just above my chest. It was the stain of privilege that I wore ever since being mocked for being the only private school student in a cheerleading team. Spending 15 years at a private Catholic school, I had lived my life as if it were nothing special: scribbling down on notebooks at school, eating fulfilling amounts of food, and engaging in conversations with my friends. But her words triggered me to ponder about my daily life and to realize that all of this was privilege. When I pause to reflect on the wider world, there are people deprived of these benefits.  They work extremely hard every single day, yet struggle to maintain a roof over their heads. It was an awakening that introduced me to a whole new way of looking at the world. I became more conscious of the fact that, although human just like me, people may have a completely different life due to their circumstances. I cultivated more interest in educating myself about the underprivileged in various societies around the world. I learned that, in developing countries, for example, many organizations are taking measures to lower the infant mortality rate while others are, at the same time, working to increase literacy rates, especially among girls. People cannot survive without effort, yet there are children around the world who are not even able to survive to the age where they have that chance. At school, I was given the opportunity to study about these issues more deeply. My private school privilege filled with books and technology was helping me to contemplate on this matter. I saw my stain in a different light and one day I was struck by an epiphany. I am now set with a new goal: creating a foundation for children in underprivileged circumstances to receive sufficient hearth care and education.