Title: Human Microbiome Analysis
In LS1b, students were to examine the Human Microbiome. For this four week long assignment, students were asked to collect three microbial samples from their local environments and determine the characteristics and identities of the bacteria. To do so, we will be amplifying the 16s Ribosomal RNA gene with PCR. The 16s Ribosomal RNA is useful when working with bacteria because it exists in all bacteria and alterations within the 16s rRNA sequence builds up slowly. This allows us to compare 16s rRNA sequences between bacteria and identify what bacteria it is or what group of bacteria it belongs to. After the PCR, we will be sending these samples will be sent to a sequencing facility where we can receive the DNA sequences for the samples. Afterwards, we compare the samples with the sample from the outgroup, the archaea Pyrococcus furiosus, by using Jalview. This allows us to align the sequences and to see the differences in the bases. From the number of differences in the bases, then we can form a phylogenetic tree. After these procedures, students were asked to analyze their findings and report them in writing

For this assignment, I chose the samples from Andrew’s shoe as my collection site from the four given options as they presented to have the most growth and were successful as can be found from their colonies’ growth. The initial collections of the colonies present to be successful as they showed bacterial growth in each of the plates. However, for the characterization assay, only Mannitol Salt Agar and Lipase Production are shown to be successful. The other characterization assay, Ampicillin in LB, Bile Esculin, and Eosin Methylene Blue (EMB) agar, were unsuccessful. This can be determined by looking at the controls in the plates for characterization assay. We can see that only in those that were successful the positive controls are actually representing what would occur when the samples turn to be positive. The rest of the plates appear to be lacking in the positive controls and not showing positive results where they should be found. This is likely due to the lack of bacteria when dabbing from the colony and streaking out into the plates. In order to avoid this, we can dab more strongly with the swabs to make sure that we are able to streak as much colony as possible out into the plates. From two of the successful characterization assay, I chose the Mannitol Salt Agar to further discuss in this assignment. The results from this characterization assay showed that colonies 1 and 2 have no growth; this indicates that these colonies are not capable of living in high salinity environments. On the other hand, colonies 3 and 4 showed growth and have also changes the agar around the colonies to yellow. These results are evidence that colonies 3 and 4 are able to live in high salinity environments and can ferment the carbohydrate (sugar) mannitol as a carbon source from the colonies that cannot ferment it. Aside from this experiment, mannitol sugar agar can be used to detect methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. This is one of the causes for infectious diseases deriving from hospitals and the number of these disease are increasing in the United States, especially in burn and intensive care units of medical school affiliated large hospitals. The present program for the detection of the methicillin-resistant S. aureus involves watching many patients under surveillance with cultures derived from several body sites. However, by using mannitol salt agar, this process can be improved. Combined with oxacillin, research showed that it required significantly fewer confirmatory tests for detection. Therefore, the mixture of mannitol salt agar and oxacillin can be used as an effective screening medium for detecting and identifying methicillin-resistant S. aureus in clinical settings.

On the subject of bacterial species, I am quite confident with the identifications as BLAST results came out as a 100% match for all of them. However, I do have reservations as results came with not only one but multiple species claiming to have a 100% match. That being said, I will be further examining the Bacillus subtilis RI4914 and Bacillus licheniformis in this write up. For the species Bacillus subtilis, it belongs to the Bacilli class and is rod-shaped much like the rest of the Bacillus family. B. subtilis is known to exist in the soil, is Gram-positive, and is believed to be a commensal species of the human gastrointestinal traits. They are also not considered to be harmful to human beings and rather beneficial when associated with plant roots. In particular, Bacillus subtilis LBBMA RI4914 was used to produce biosurfactants. Biosurfactants are surface active metabolites produced by various micro-organisms. These lower the surface tension of a liquid, the tension between two liquids, or the tension between a liquid and a solid. One thing that I personally found interesting was that despite the abundance of Bacillus subtilis in soil, this was isolated from a heavy oil reservoir. Due to this fact, it is highly unlikely that this bacteria can be commonly associated with the site that this was collected. However, because Bacillus subtilis can be found in soil which is a more familiar environment, it is plausible that a different strand from this species was identified instead. For the characterization assays for this colony, the Lipase Production assay was consistent with my expectations but the rest were shown to be inconsistent. The reason for consistency is because as it can be found to lower the tension between surfaces, it needs to be able to break down fat in the membrane structures. Despite this, the others were proven to be false. For the Mannitol Salt Agar, because the colony was found in an oil reservoir, we can estimate that it does not need to be able to live in high salinity environments. However, one explanation is that even though viability in high salinity is not necessary for the bacteria in oil, it can be explained as most of the Bacillus subtilis can be found outdoors where it is subject to natural changes. As for the rest of the assays, we cannot determine whether these fit the expectations as the results for the assays themselves are not viable. This is due to the aforementioned technological error.

Moving on to Bacillus licheniformis, this also has a rod-shape and is a part of the Bacilli class. This can be isolated from soil and produce acteriocin-like peptides to combat against the harmful Gram-positive bacteria and fungal pathogens. Bacillus licheniformis is known to be harmful to human beings and act as a pathogen for sepsis mostly in immunocompromised patients. This being said, Bacillus licheniformis functions as an antibiotic, producing the first peptide antibiotic, Bacitracin. This is widely applied in the medical and veterinary fields. On the other hand, they exist in more familiar environments as well: food. Many fermentation processes happen with the use of Bacillus. In fact, soybean fermentation including Bacillus licheniformis actually increases insulin levels in that it contributes to anti-diabetic activities. The researchers fermented using different bacteria from Bacillus and found that traditionally fermented beans with Bacillus licheniformis can serve as an anti-diabetic measure. One interesting thing that I have found is that despite its capabilities to fight against the Gram-positive bacteria, it fails to attack the Gram-negative bacteria. This bacteria can be associated with the source as shoes ending up with soil where is plausible. The characterization assays for this bacteria are consistent with the expectations as both Mannitol Salt Agar and Lipase Production proved to be positive. Since the bacteria lives in soil, it is essential for them to possess these features. For the rest of the assays, I was unable to compare them due to the aforementioned technical errors.

Broader Impacts

I learned from this experiment that Bacillus licheniformis may be a key to anti-diabetic treatment. This, when further developed, can be used to help many of those suffering with diabetes. To put this in action, I would first need to determine how much Bacillus licheniformis is necessary to yield the most effective results. Once this has been identified, we then move on to search for the most efficient means for intake of the three forms injection, pills, or food. With two of these information combined, these serve as a stepping stone for utilizing this discovery. The anti-diabetic soybean fermentation can be an easy way to ameliorate those with mild diabetic symptoms or those who prefer plant-derived medications. I am curious to see how long the effects last as it may appear to be more cost-efficient than the current methods. Diabetes is one of the most prevalent disease in the world. If new discovery were to be made to help those were in need, it would help many people from this disease. This research was focused on what medication can be taken after they are diagnosed. I am interested to see whether any preventative means can be find by exploring the microorganisms.