Title: Access in Biotechnology - A Conversation with Michael Sandel
There is no doubt that in current society, technology, especially biotechnology, is evolving rapidly. With its development, however, comes the moral dilemma of whether we should pursue this advancement. In his essay on “The case against perfection” in The Atlantic Monthly, Michael J. Sandel states that gene editing carries a dangerous effect since “promise to mastery is flawed” (62). This means that if we were to attain this mastery or perfection, we are left with no appreciation for life as a gift because the technology would lessen the value of life. While he continues to talk about the philosophical implications of gene editing, Sandel acknowledges the potential of “creating two classes of human beings”: those with access to enhancements and their descendants and those without such access (52). However, he argues that thinking about this division of society “ignores the moral status of enhancement itself” (52). He continues to discuss the moral issues on this technology on the basis that these two are completely separate aspects and that if he were to discuss one, the other would be irrelevant to the discussion.

However, I argue that access is an important factor when consulting gene editing. The ability to afford these technologies would affect whether a person would have the freedom to decide whether to utilize this technology, leading to an eventual division in society. This is because only people with the ability to afford the technology are able to install it and would be able to aim for perfection. This will leave others without any motivation to pursue the better, resulting in a social division or a creation of “two classes of human beings” (52). Even today, without gene editing, we are experiencing disparity in society. Wealthy parents who want their children to succeed do everything they can in their power to help them accomplish. Those without such opportunities would be compelled to work much harder in order to compete with them. This trend of social disparity will continue and will be more drastic when gene editing were to be utilized. Since the gene editing will be hereditary and the effects would be more extreme, only the selected few who can afford it would be the ones capable of reaching perfection and very few measures can be taken to narrow the gap between the rich and the poor. I agree with Sandel that moral issues should be taken into account when discussing gene editing; however, I argue that access should also be considered to be as equally as important since it is the fundamental component of this moral debate.

Sandel gives a compelling argument for ""moral status"" being an integral part of opposing gene editing. He argues that this technology would lead to human beings not having ""an appreciation of the gifted character of human powers and achievements"" (54). ""Acknowledging giftedness of character"", in his words, is to ""recognize that our talents and powers are not wholly our own doing"" (54). Today without gene editing, we are constantly faced with many obstacles we cannot overcome. In the examples, he goes into detail on how parents treat their children. Currently, without gene editing, we accept the fact that certain things are beyond our reach. Certainly, it is meaningful to strive for the better, yet we are content when we try the best we can. However, some parents are ""promoting and demanding all manner of accomplishments from their children” even in our current society (57). Sandel argues that this would only worsen if gene editing were to be installed; we would lose the sense of ""life as a gift"" (56). If this were to happen, the value of life would be cheapened. In a parent-children relationship, children would be objectified and parents would lose track of what are the children's actual doings and what are because of the technology. This can lead to parents only using children as a means for success and not appreciating them as they are. The installment of gene editing will shift parents' perspectives from appreciating children's doings to searching for better enhancements to further develop children's abilities. From this example, we can see how Sandel articulates that gene editing can lead to less appreciation for life as it is which is morally problematic.

While it is reasonable for Sandel to discuss potential moral objections to gene editing, he wrongly assumes that access is not as important an issue to consider in his argument against this technology. He believes that access to technology is completely separate from the moral discussion of technology. As Sandel notes, ""worry about access ignores the moral status of enhancement itself"" (52). He does not take into account that access is one of the determining factors when people are considering whether to accept this technology being a part of their lives. In other words, he considers accessibility as something completely separate from moral issues and not consider the two to be intertwined. Moreover, he asks, ""is [enhancement] troubling because the unenhanced poor would be denied the benefits of bioengineering, or because the enhanced affluent would somehow be dehumanized?"" (52) Here, he is implying the possibility that the poor would not be able to attain the benefits of gene editing and the rich with enhancements will become a superhuman, which is something not resembling a human being. Nevertheless, Sandel dismisses this idea by stating that philosophical issues are more important than thinking about access. He assumes that considering access would shield him away from thinking about the larger issue: concerns on morals.

Nevertheless, accessibility should be consulted at the same time as moral ideas since it leads to social stratification. While Sandel introduces the idea that this technology will lead to creating ""two classes of human beings"" (52), he does not discuss this any further. It is evident that when the people with the affordability to adopt gene editing do so, the division will occur. Whereas the poor would be limited to not being able to consider the installation of gene editing. Even without gene editing, we can see many incidents of societal division. For example, if a healthy student was able to afford a memory enhancer, such as medication taken by patients with attention deficits, he would be able to concentrate more than usual on a test, scoring better than others who were not able to take the pill. Likewise, children with affluent backgrounds will be able to afford tutoring, making them more eligible to attend better institutions, causing a difference in their career choices. Since gene editing is more permanent than other measures, the divide will persist, resulting in the creation of superhuman species and their subspecies. Sandel successfully mentioned this happening but he failed to state it in detail. He states that ""the fundamental question is not how to ensure equal access to enhancement but whether we should aspire to it in the first place"" (52). Here, he acknowledges the presence of access becoming an issue but dismisses it. Instead of access, he views moral issues as being more significant. However, with disregarding access, he fails to talk about the societal division that is likely to happen after the installment of gene editing.

Without considering access, Sandel assumes that the moral argument is universal when in reality, it depends on socioeconomic status. He starts off the essay saying that the rapid development of technology led to “men and women [struggling] to articulate their unease” (51). This statement generalizes that men and women, regardless of their backgrounds, are opposed to new technology. It is obvious that not everyone shares a uniformed opinion towards the novelty. One of the reasons to cause the difference in viewpoints is people’s affordability which is closely related to their socioeconomic status. For instance, if a person had an affluent family and was able to go to “expensive schools,” he may be more educated on the subject matter than his neighbor who went to his local public school. This difference in educational background is one example of how socioeconomic status will determine people’s opinions on gene editing. Affluent people would have the option to think about whether they can install the technology or not, while the poor would solely have to sit and watch. This difference suggests that the richest members of society would be the ones who would actually use the technology, eventually leading to a great division in society.

In his discussion on moral issues, Sandel should have considered social stratification’s relevance to morality. Not addressing the threat of this divide occurring is what makes Sandel’s argument on ethics ineffective. A division in society is one of the pressing problems in this world today and if this were to be accelerated, it would be morally problematic. Sandel assumes that moral issues and access are opposed to one another. This can be found when he mentions “worry about access ignores the moral status of enhancement itself” (52). From this, we can see that Sandel views these two as being opposed to one another when actually it is in juxtaposition. However, the presence of division is ethically concerning. As I have mentioned, even today, some children are enrolled in expensive schools, have private tutors, go to tennis camp, take piano lessons, ballet lessons, swimming lessons, SAT-prep courses (58). On the other hand, some are forced to live without any of these supplements. This difference in affordability has resulted in creating a divide in society. Some people may argue that those with such opportunities will help those in need; however, in this society, those willing to help are still the minority (62). Moral concerns do not go against discussing access. Rather, they go hand in hand with each other. Sandel should have consulted access to strengthen his argument about morals.

To conclude, Sandel should have consulted access when debating gene editing. Access is an essential component since it determines whether one can afford the technology or not. Although Sandel views access as being irrelevant when considering moral issues, these two are closely related. This is because the subset of people who are able to afford the technology will create a further division in society. Today, even without technology, our society is facing social disparity. Should gene editing were to be installed, the divide would further widen, causing a moral dilemma. Therefore, Sandel should have mentioned access as it is intertwined with the philosophical issues that he claims. Access should not be neglected in his argument on gene editing being hazardous.